# Gene-Selection

Cancer Classification from Gene Expressions via Ensembled Neural Networks

Author: Peter Jourgensen

Classification of cancer tissue cells based on microarray expression levels has been of of great interest over the last 30 years. The struggle often resides in the fact that datasets tend to contain few samples in comparison to their number of features. Some approaches tend towards optimizing a model for a given selection of features, while others tend towards optimizing the selection of features before giving them to a model. Back in 1999, Golub et al. researched the efficacy of selecting genes based on their correlations to the class distinction before applying a weighted voting system to classify a given patient. Nowadays there are many approaches to selecting genes, but a common goal remains to estimate the effect of gene interactions on final classification. With a high feature space, however, this results in a combinatorial explosion of interactions and too small a sample space to accurately estimate the significance of a given interaction. In this report, I discuss a new approach to selecting significant genes based on their interactions with others. I begin by applying an ensembling method to a neural network base model, whereby I select random subsets of the training data before training them on the base model and making predictions on a held out set. The accuracies of the model are then translated into weights before being used to score each individual gene. The hypothesis is that combinations of high scoring genes will serve as strong predictors for cancer class. Finally, I take various selections of the highest scoring genes and run them through a K-Nearest Neighbors model for prediction. Using the data from Golub et al.’s paper, this approach is able to achieve 97.2% classification accuracy on the collection of patients.
